What is Nuclear for Climate?
Nuclear for Climate
Nuclear for Climate is a grassroots initiative which promotes the dialogue with policymakers and the public about the inclusion of nuclear energy among the carbon-free solutions to climate change.
Nuclear for Climate is an initiative gathering nuclear professionals and scientists from over 150 societies and associations, with the goal of opening a dialogue with policymakers and the public about the necessity of including nuclear energy among the carbon-free solutions to climate change.
It was co-founded by the European Nuclear Society (ENS), the French Nuclear Society (SFEN), and the American Nuclear Society (ANS) in 2015, ahead of the COP21 conference in Paris.
Since 2015, over 150 nuclear associations have shared our declaration messages via social media, and our Twitter account reached over 300,000 tweet impressions around the world. Our award-winning grassroots communications campaign was retweeted by high-profile news publications such as the NY Times, NBC, and ABC news.
Nuclear for Climate has a global presence on social media and in-person. There have been delegations at international conferences, such as the United Nations COPs from 21, to 28, where activists promoted nuclear energy as a key player in negotiations around climate change. The delegation also hosted side events, flash mobs, and participated in panel discussions with representatives from environmental NGOs, the IAEA, and national delegates.
Our Message
?Climate change is a global issue that requires coordinated action across nations, organizations, and individuals.
Nuclear Power is a low-carbon, reliable, affordable, and abundant energy source that, alongside renewables, provides the fastest path to achieving Net Zero by 2050 and a secure energy future.
The multiple peaceful applications of nuclear science and technology will also help us fulfill the UN Sustainable Development Goals and achieve a sustainable future for all.

NET ZERO NEEDS NUCLEAR
We believe that Net Zero Needs Nuclear and these are the reasons why:
Nuclear is a proven and effective low-carbon energy source: Nuclear produces no greenhouse gas emissions while in operation and can replace our current reliance on polluting fossil fuel sources.
Nuclear is available, scalable, and deployable: New nuclear needs to be deployed at scale and urgently, along with renewables, in order for Net Zero targets to be achievable.
Nuclear is a flexible, affordable, and secure source of clean energy: Nuclear can integrate with an increasing supply of variable renewables and variable grid demand to deliver efficient, affordable, and secure clean energy systems.
Nuclear can deliver more than just low-carbon electricity: Nuclear is also capable of supporting the decarbonisation of other sectors, such as heating and transport.
Nuclear supports inclusive and sustainable global development: Nuclear promotes global socio-economic benefits and is strongly aligned with the UN Sustainable Development Goals.
Nuclear Power is the fastest path to a Net Zero future for all
The latest IPCC report states that extreme weather events will continue to increase globally. This highlights the need for low-carbon, reliable, affordable, and abundant energy that is not weather dependent, all characteristics delivered by Nuclear Power.
The resilience and reliability of nuclear technology are essential as the climate is becoming more hostile much sooner than we initially predicted. UNECE has established that if nuclear power is excluded from the global portfolio, the global climate objectives cannot be met.
Nuclear Power offers a unique opportunity for a healthy, resilient, low-carbon post-COVID recovery that prevents future threats, creates decent jobs, and unlocks inclusive, sustainable growth for all.

